every time I grow a new beard there are
more white hairs in it you tell me if it
is a blessing or a curse that the video
quality on this camera is not high
enough so you and the audience cannot
see just how many white hairs are in the
spirit the concept of a global minimum
wage is something so obvious so simple
and so fundamental that would be
supported by people on the far left
conservatives and even people on the far
right not only out of some kind of
idealistic desire to make the world a
better place but in fact out of brutal
self-interest
it's an idea whose time has not yet come
but I think it's coming soon I think we
can see the need to articulate this goal
of a global minimum wage in the
incoherent responses to the breakdown of
the neoliberal paradigm that are
reflected equally in Bernie Sanders and
Donald Trump both Bernie Sanders and
Donald Trump are populist with an anti
neoliberal agenda both Bernie Sanders
and Donald Trump vaguely say that
they're gonna make America great again
if you don't believe me Bernie Sanders
book the 2016 book our revolution he's
promising he's gonna make Detroit great
again and this is getting at the same
kind of mythology the lost days of yore
when heavy manufacturing industry the
car industry in Detroit was booming
that's what Bernie Sanders is promising
he's gonna bring America back to that's
the greatness Bernie Sanders wants to
revive ok
both Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump
have a somewhat incoherent discourse
about making America great again
and they both articulate this in tandem
with a rhetoric blaming China and
blaming Mexico for the
deindustrialization of America
the unmaking of America's former
greatness now I'm not even saying
they're wrong what I'm saying is they
present this rhetoric which is merely
the politics of complaining about a
problem and what remains left unsaid is
the promise of any possible solution
right so you know okay mm-hmm the United
States NAFTA okay Donald Trump came into
power saying that NAFTA was a terrible
agreement he never supported it even
right now in 2019 Bernie Sanders is
running for office he's running for
president states repeatedly saying NAFTA
was a terrible trade agreement and he
never supported it I really I'm not
getting you um
NAFTA the bone of contention here is
free trade between the United States and
Mexico leading to Mexicans manufacturing
everything Americans use not just cars
but including cars cars and car parts
okay um both Bernie Sanders and Donald
Trump reject the neoliberal paradigm and
they reject Bill Clinton's decision to
grant China permanent normal trade
relations PNTR PNTR was created just so
that America could stop using the term
most favored nation status there was a
time when most favored nation status was
only extended to countries the United
States actually viewed favorably and as
they were starting to extend this
special trade status to despised and
enemy nations like Communist China um
someone had to come up with a go
confusing new acronym anyway during the
Bill Clinton presidency there were
negotiations and a settlement and
fatefully you know those decisions made
during the the Bill Clinton era utterly
transformed both the United States and
China transform Europe to transform most
of the world and resulted in the
situation we have right now most of the
computer equipment I'm using to record
this YouTube video is made in China or
partly made
China and it's very likely that the
computer and the computer screen and the
other equipment your you're seeing
mister it's very likely that it's made
in China or that it's at least partly
made in China
so this transformed the world in various
ways ah okay so here we are in the year
2019 2020 elections are coming out
there's somewhat incoherence post
neoliberal anti neoliberal political
discourse emerging both on the left and
on the right what they're gonna do how
they gonna achieve this well you might
or might not have noticed that when
Donald Trump was renegotiating the trade
agreement with Mexico one element of it
proposed or achieved was to force Mexico
to pay the laborers in the automotive
industry more to pay a higher wage to
the people making cars and car parts in
Mexico and honestly I don't know how
that story ends
and there in principle you already have
the first step towards a global minimum
wage and you have a hint at why it would
be in the interests of the wealthy and
not just the poor to bring about this
change okay if any of you are old enough
to remember there was a time when the
United States of America responded to
the unwanted competition of Japanese car
manufacturers Mitsubishi Toyota so on
and so forth
with panic and it's very strange because
the discourse I remember believed to
have read formal articles both as have
read book chapters about it and part of
my university education not just part of
my child experience um it seemed like
every possible explanation for the
Japanese superiority of manufacturing
cars was invoked except the inequality
and wages Hey it's like you know of
course the exchange rates were blamed
like the exchange rate between Japanese
yen and the US dollar there were a lot
of vague idea that somehow the Japanese
were tougher or meaner than Americans
that you know Detroit was some kind of
decadent place where unionization or
moral lassitude resulted in the
automotive industry fallen by and that
the Japanese somehow just had a superior
level of technology or level of social
organization or were harder working or
were they just wanted it more you gotta
hand it to those dolphins they just
wanted it more you know the American
spirit was held up to the Japanese
spirit and Americans asked themselves
briefly why is it that you know Detroit
can't compete with why is it that they
produce cars more ships than us and of
course a really important part of the
answer is because wages were lower in
Japan because the minimum wage was very
low and you're bad because the actual
amount being paid to automotive workers
was lower in Japan and this hinted at
what would
we destroy the American automotive
industry which was in Japan who was
Mexico and now just lately even China
if the wealthier countries say the
poorer countries we will not let you
export these manufactured items to us
unless you pay your workers a fair wage
this doesn't just benefit the poor in
the downtrodden of the world it benefits
industry within those wealthier
countries it benefits the working-class
everywhere it raises standards of living
and it also creates an incentive for
third-world countries to adopt higher
levels of Technology higher levels of
organization and so on - to not rely on
just mass employment at the lowest
possible level of manual labor right now
that's also in the interest of Western
countries because if poor countries are
going to increase their level of
technology for manufacturing its most
likely they're gonna do it by buying or
importing the technology from countries
that are already Western so it's going
to result in poor countries moving up
the value chain more rapidly and it
would also result in places like Detroit
being capable of producing cars at a
competitive rate now if you say that's
completely impossible you know you have
a point maybe you know maybe your
perspective is that manufacturing cars
is only possible in countries that have
a very very low minimum wage what
country has the highest minimum wages in
the world of course that's gonna have to
be adjusting for cost of living
adjusting for exchange rates you have to
make a lot of just long story short what
country has the highest minimum wage in
the world it's Australia and guess what
Australia actually does have a car
manufacturing industry they actually do
make and export some cars
Australia is actually a really
interesting case study if you want to
see what happens the good and the bad of
it when you have higher minimum wages
nobody right now is really asking what
the knock-on effects would be of Bernie
Sanders increased the American minimum
wage if it's carried out in isolation
nobody wants to really think through the
impact on Louisiana on second-string
cities throughout the United States on
rural areas if suddenly there's a $15
minimum wage in the poorer parts within
the United States as well as a $15
minimum wage in big cities like Seattle
and Los Angeles there are some really
really serious dislocations some really
serious disadvantages that are going to
ensue that are worth thinking through
now by the way I do support increasing
the minimum wage in states I'm just
warning you know there is no such thing
as a free lunch in economics there's no
policy that's a hundred percent
advantageous and zero percent dis
advantageous but the other thing that's
gonna happen if you think about it
internationally increasing the minimum
wage in America is also increasing the
gap that separates the cost of
manufacturing in America from the cost
of manufacturing in Mexico or the cost
of manufacturing in China or any other
poor country where things now are
manufactured so precisely the evil that
Bernie Sanders is ranting against
endlessly both read his book and I've
listened to a lot of his lectures now
Bernie Sanders is always talking with
the evils of neoliberalism and jobs
moving overseas well guess what Bernie
if you get your dream and you pass a $15
minimum wage in the United States you
will accelerate and exacerbate the
fleeing of manufacturing jobs out of the
United States to countries that have
lower wages including Mexico right next
door now what would be the way to
counteract that Donald Trump has had
some really vague and self-contradictory
like about that but what he allegedly I
will do to just kind of bully companies
into staying in the United States Bernie
Sanders also has some very incoherent
rhetoric which he's basically just
blaming and angry at companies for
moving jobs offshore I think he suggests
changes to the tax code or something to
disincentivize these things point number
three on screen here is an example of
how incoherent Bernie Sanders promises
are on this issue he means well but what
would actually happen if he followed
this plan is that Americans would
continue to import cheaply manufactured
goods from Mexico that continue to
import cheaply manufactured goods from
China both of those countries would
continue to pay their workers low wages
the cost of American wages would go up
because Bernie Sanders has his $15 an
hour minimum wage he would punish
American companies that move jobs
offshore but he's not going to punish
American companies that simply import
manufactured goods from China and Mexico
and also what if it's a French company
that owns a factory in Vietnam what if
it's a Canadian company that owns a
factory in China what if it's a German
company that owns a factory in Mexico
all of those will continue expertise
United States so all it's doing is
excluding American companies uniquely
from participating this part of
neoliberal competition this would be a
disaster it works as rhetoric to get
yourself elected but you do not need a
degree in economics to see that this is
deeply on coherent the thing you can do
is you can say to Mexico look if you
want to be able to export your goods
here to the United States of America you
have to pay your workers $12 an hour
something like this which for Mexico
might be a huge increase and you could
say the same to Japan and you could say
the same to China and you could say the
same to Vietnam and Malaysia to all
these different countries your trading
partners with you could say look if you
are not paying your workers a decent
salary why should we accept Manny
goods from your country and in a sense
you can make this sting a little more by
saying you will accept raw materials but
you'll create this incentive to say look
if what you want to send us our finished
products or manufactured goods then you
have to meet our standards for what is a
decent wage what is a decent minimum
wage for your workers it's not a right
to export goods in the United States
it's a privilege and we're only gonna
grant those those privileges to
countries that treat their workers
decently it's really extending the same
principle whereby many countries in the
past refused to trade with or accept
goods from countries that had slavery
it's just that instead of it being
slavery you're objecting to its people
being paid two dollars an hour or five
dollars an hour instead of total dollars
but the other thing is it's ultimately
transparently completely self-serving
it's the ultimate form of protectionism
because it's also saying hey look if you
want to manufacture cars that's great
you can manufacture cars and you can
export them the United States you can
export them to Europe but if we're gonna
compete to see who really makes the best
car then all of us are gonna pay our
workers $12 an hour or $15 an hour
whatever we all have to pay our workers
the same minimum wage because otherwise
we're not really competing for who makes
a better car
we're just competing for who can pay
their workers less global minimum wage
is a policy that would be supported by
the left it would be supported by
conservatives on the right it would be
supported by the vast majority of
everyone because it's everyone's
interest and it actually avoids the
social dislocations and disadvantages to
just having a minimum wage within one
country which is what Bernie Sanders is
right now proposing however at this
moment it's a political idea that is
being propelled 'add and supported by
absolutely no-one and the best thing of
all is this can be implemented with
absolutely no violence with no need even
for a United Nations resolution or
international governing body to oversee
it it can be implemented country by
country just by signing a green
trade agreements trade pacts we say look
if you want to export to our country
this is the standard you need to meet
[Music]